Promises are a new feature in JavaScript as of ES6. But that means they are really useful to have them
introduce as part of the language.
Right?
Well you're absolutely right.
Promises are everywhere.
And in this video I'm going to show you what they are, how they work and hopefully we'll understand why
we should all be jumping for joy that we have them instead of callbacks.
Now in order to understand promises let's define it.
A promise is an object that may produce a single value sometime in the future. Either a resolved value,
or a reason that it's not resolved or rejected.
A promise maybe in one of three possible states fulfilled, rejected or pending.
Huh.
Let's figure out what that means in this video so that by the end of it that is all going to make sense
to you.
Now in order to fully grasp the concept we must first talk about what we had before promises and that is
callbacks.
Something like this.
When something is done execute this piece of code. Callbacks in javascript are exactly that.
I text my friend Bob and say Hey Bob what's that really good song by the Backstreet Boys.
When Bob has time he called me back and says oh yea-yea that song-
It's
I want it that way.
And that's exactly what's happening here too.
We have an element that we're adding an event listener to.
And when a user clicks we're going to have the callback submit form. That is once the user clicks we're
going to answer with submit form.
Let's think of another example.
Let's say we're creating a game and we have this move player function that has the distance to move
the player and the direction.
Well, if I wanted to move player 100 to the left I'd run that. Once that is done
I want it to run a callback function which is to move player 400 to the left again and then another callback
function right after that is done to move player 10 to the right and another callback option to move
player 330 to the left.
And we have something called the pyramid of doom.
This is obviously a simple example.
But with callbacks you'll get this nested- nested function and you create this pyramid of really really
complicated code of this happens, then this happens and this happens and this happens and it's really
really hard to read.
Let me show you a more realistic example.
Let's say we had some sort of an app that uses Twitter and let me make this bigger so you can see we
have a grabTweets
function that the first parameter has the URL
For now I just simplified it.
We just passed Twitter and the Twitter handle.
And then the callback function after you grab the tweets which has an error.
And the tweets.
And if there's an error we throw an error.
So that just creates an error in javascript.
Otherwise we're going to display the tweets.
But then if andrei's tweets were successful then we also want to grab the tweets again.
Let's do Elon Musk this time and again if error
We're going to throw error.
Otherwise we're going to display his tweets.
And if that's successful then we're also going to grab Vitalik Buterin's tweets.
And again if error, throw error otherwise display tweets. And that doesn't look very pretty does it?
I mean we have to do the same thing we have to check for error.
And each time we have it nested and just overall we have a lot of repetition of code.
Now promises serve the same purpose as callbacks.
So why do we have two things.
Well promises are new in ES6 and they are a little bit more powerful.
Let me show you what a promise looks like.
You remember this move player code.
Well this with a promise will look something like this.
Doesn't that look much much better but it's really hard to grasp what's happening here without really
knowing how to create a promise.
So let's start with that.
I'm going to remove this and create our very first promise. We'll say const promise equals-
and this is a new syntax that you'll just have to get used to.
'new Promise()'
So we're creating a new promise and this promise has parameter that either resolves or rejects.
And in here- in this function we have the option to let's just say either resolve.
Let's just do 'stuff worked' or reject and in this case we have an 'Error, it broke'.
Now we obviously want to have a conditional statement here we'll say if condition in our case we'll just
let it be true for now.
if true-
So this is if the promise returned we're going to resolve it.
Otherwise we're going to reject.
And here's the thing.
This looks confusing without actually knowing the application.
But I want you to just have this over here so you can take a look at it as we progress through this
video this is going to make more and more sense.
So now that we have a promise if I put this into my console, my Chrome browser.
All right
I have the promise now.
But how can we get this promise to run now.
Well I can just do promise.then
So again once the promise is resolved or rejected .then I want to get the results and then we want to
console.log the 'result'.
That's it.
So let's see what happens here.
I'm going to copy this paste it on here.
"Stuff Worked".
All right.
So we ran the promise it ran this part and because we've just made if equals to true it's going to
run the resolve.
And the resolve is going to send "Stuff Worked" into the result and we're going to console.log "Stuff
Worked."
And you also see over here that the promise is resolved.
Again if I just log 'promise' here I see that we have the promise with 'Stuff Worked' awesome.
Okay
So based on what we know now let's just take a look at what we can do with promises.
Let's say that now with 'Stuff Worked' I want to grab the result.
And add an exclamation mark to it and then- and this is called chaining in promises.
Then after I do that it's going to return this return the result with the exclamation mark and in our case
I just want to get the 'result2'.
And we will just console.log 'result2'.
All right.
Well let's see what happens now.
So I have my promise just to make sure that we have it here.
Perfect.
And we're going to run the promise stuff worked with the exclamation mark very cool.
But what happens if something happens in between here we just have a console.log, but
let's say we have an error and that error causes us to throw an error.
Well what happens now? With promises you can actually do something called '.catch()'
And this will catch any error that the promise may have.
In our case we just want a console.log
And now if I run this
we console log the error.
Let's just make this a little bit cleaner.
So that you can see exactly what is happening.
So again copy and paste.
There you go we get the error.
If the throw error happens before, let's say it happens
above
and we want to return this
Well if I move the throw error at the top over here. Save and again copy and paste. Let's clean this up a
bit and see that we still get the error.
So .catch catches any errors that may happen between the chains .then which is very very cool.
All right so I have a little question for you.
What happens if we do something along this line- let me just go back to what we have before. We don't
have an error anymore.
But this time we have the result2 plus the question mark.
So we're going to add a question mark to that.
We're going to return that.
We're going to catch with Console.log error.
And after that we're going to have a .then
result3 and then result3 will have a
result3
plus
let's do another exclamation mark.
And we want to console log this so again.
Whoops.
We're going to console.log
this all right.
What do you think is going to happen?
Let's see.
We save, copy and paste and look at that.
We have 'stuffed worked' - or 'Stuff Worked!?!' - haha
Exclamation questionmark exclamation.
So '.catch' only runs if something fails in between here.
But because I placed it before this, if this fails
- well I don't get the error console. I get an error within our console because we did throw an error, but the
catch statement never runs.
So where you put the catch statement is- it's going to check and run if anything before it fails.
All right.
Awesome.
So that's how we create a promise.
A promise has a resolve and a reject.
And so far it's only been resolved.
It's just worked out.
We've never run the reject.
We'll do that later on.
But we see that with a promise we can give it to a variable and run this and do something with it asynchronously.
When we run .then and get the result and do whatever you want with it we can keep chaining it and
we can also catch our errors.
A promise is something that you have now that you can use around your code even though you don't have
the value just yet.
You can just assign it to a variable like we did here to a const promise.
"Now, when would this be a good thing?"
Well promises are great for asynchronous programming. If you don't remember what that is
Make sure you check out my video on 'how javascript works' to grasp the concept.
When you don't want javascript to block the execution of your code like making API calls, grabbing data
from a database or maybe optimizing an image you use a promise so that the task happens in the back
when the promise gets resolved or rejected then you'll get that response.
Now let's show you something else that promises can do.
That makes them really really powerful.
Let's say that within here we had another promise a const promise2 and this promise again has
a resolve.
reject
Im going to make this a little bit smaller and this 'resolve, reject' is going to have a setTimeout. So setTimeout
is a web API it allows us to time out and run something after a few seconds.
So 'setTimeout()'
We're going to say "resolve in 100 seconds" or "100 milliseconds" the 'HIII' text
Okay.
Don't worry too much about the syntax.
Essentially this is saying, "Run this and return resolve 'HIII' in 100 millisecond."
Let's also have another promise.
Let's say promise3
and this one resolves in one second.
And this one's going to say 'POOKIE'.
And then finally a fourth promise and this fourth promise is going to resolve
in three seconds.
And it's going to say 'Is it me you are looking for?'.
All right.
So we have these promises.
Well again a feature that we have is something called 'Promise.all()' and promise.all takes
an array of promises.
In our case 'promise' (one), 'promise2', 'promise3' and then lets do 'promise4', that's a lot of promises
and in here we can do a .then
And the values will be returned as an array in the order that they were just written down.
And here we can just console.log values let's save.
And I'm going to copy this into our console.
Actually let's just copy and paste.
All of these, watch the bottom of the screen here as I press enter.
One, two, three, four, five and we have our result
Five seconds later. You see here that even though these ones took a lot less well because we did 'promise.all'
it waited until all the promises were resolved and then logged out the values very cool.
And by the way, the reason that if I do this: where I assign the variables first and then run 'promise.all'
the result is instant.
And that is because we've already run these promises right.
We've assigned it to a variable and between the time that we copied and pasted this in here these promises
in the background have been resolved.
All right.
Let's finish up with the final example that has some real world applications so that you have an idea
of when we want to use promises
I'm going to delete this, refresh.
Now I have here a list of URLs and these URLs are from a simple API.
Let me show you.
Called JSON placeholder and they just give us some end points that we could use such as users that return
us some JSON data.
So I have users, posts and albums here.
And this is very similar to something you do on a Website where you want to grab some information maybe
from your server from the database with users, posts and albums and let's say that they're all important
to us for the page for the profile page of the user.
"How can we grab them all?" Well again using promises we can just to promise.all
and we can just grab the URLs.
And in this case we can just map over this so it's an array.
And with each URL that we grab. We want to- we want to fetch again a web API to grab URLs make
an AJAX call to the URL
.then we want to run the response through the response.json again
That just comes with fetch
that you need to do
and then from here we can do a .then
And this is going to return us remember an array because we're getting a promise.
All these fetches it's going to return results these results.
Well for now let's just console.log
them and we'll do results.
The first one
the second one and the third one. Let's see if that works. I'm going to copy all of these.
Let's go back to our page.
Copy and paste our code waiting a bit.
And there you go.
There's our response.
We see that we've got undefine here because I put three here instead of two. Let's do that. We copy and
paste this again going to refresh the page and there you go.
We have our users we have our posts and then we also have our albums.
Very cool.
Let's say that something fails here maybe we misspelled one of the URLs.
So the users API won't work.
Let's add a .catch and console.log
error. If I copy and paste this refresh and again run this through the console look at that we get an error. With
promised.all if everything fails because we need users, posts and albums for our entire page on
our website.
We get a 'reject' from the promise and we can catch it and we can do whatever we want with this error.
Very cool.
All right so let's fix that.
So it's working again.
And there you go.
That's why promises are so beneficial.
We're able to do something like this in a very clean way.
Remember the fetch simply returns
A promise. If I just run fetch here
You see that I get a promise that's pending.
And by adding a .then we are answering to whatever the promise returns with whether it's resolved
or rejects.
And get to manipulate the debt.
So at their most basic promises are a bit like event listeners except a promise can only succeed or
fail once it cannot succeed or fail twice.
And this is extremely useful for things that are asynchronous
Success and failure such as API calls because we're less interested in the exact time something became
available and more interested in reacting to the outcome.
So we're reacting to something that happens asynchronously.
So again let's remember what we started with a promise is an object that may produce a single value
sometime in the future either resolved or rejected with a reason why it was rejected and a promise maybe
in one of three possible states it can be fulfilled, rejected or pending. See that wasn't so bad was it now
go off and practice some promises and see all their power.
I'll see you in the next one. Bye-bye.